\documentclass{article}
\usepackage{amsmath,amssymb,amsthm}
\usepackage{color}
\usepackage{hyperref}
\usepackage{stmaryrd}
\usepackage{float}
\usepackage{listings}
\usepackage{graphicx}
\usepackage{fullpage}
\usepackage{times}

% Editing marks.
\input{../latex_common/editingmarks}

% Other presentational stuff
\input{../latex_common/style}

\begin{document}

\title{Thesis Proposal: \\
  Lattice-based Data Structures for \\
  Deterministic Parallel and Distributed Programming}

\author{Lindsey Kuper \\ Indiana University}

\date{Draft of \today}

\maketitle

\begin{abstract}
  Abstract goes here.
\end{abstract}

\section{Introduction}

Parallel programming is notoriously difficult.  \lk{Difficult to who?}
A fundamental reason for this notoriety is that programs can yield
inconsistent results, or even crash, due to unpredictable interactions
between parallel tasks.  But it doesn't have to be this way:
\emph{deterministic-by-construction} parallel programming models offer
the promise of freedom from subtle, hard-to-reproduce nondeterministic
bugs in parallel code.

A deterministic-by-construction programming model is one that ensures
that all programs written using the model have the same
\emph{observable behavior} every time they are run.  What does
``observable behavior'' mean?  There are many ways to define what is
observable about a program.  Clearly, we do \emph{not} wish to
preserve behaviors such as running time across multiple
runs---ideally, a deterministic-by-construction parallel program will
run faster when more parallel resources are available!  In this
proposal, we define the observable behavior of a program to be the
value to which it evaluates.  Specifically, we do not count the
behavior of the scheduler as observable.  Indeed, the purpose of our
deterministic-by-construction model will be to allow tasks to be
scheduled dynamically and unpredictably, without allowing such
\emph{schedule nondeterminism} to affect the observable behavior.

Introduce the problem.

Explain, at a high level, what my work does to solve the problem.

Explain what the structure of this proposal will be.

This citation \cite{LVars-TR} is here to make LaTeX happy.

\section{Background}

\section{Thesis statement}

\section{Technical overview}

\section{LVars and CRDTs}

\section{Related work}

\section{Road map}

\bibliographystyle{abbrvnat}
\bibliography{../latex_common/refs}

\end{document}
