\section{Proof of quasi-determinism for $\lambdaLVish$}\label{s:quasi-proof-of-quasi-determinism}

In this section, I give a proof of quasi-determinism for
$\lambdaLVish$ that formalizes the claim made earlier in this chapter:
that, for a given program, although some executions may raise
exceptions, all executions that produce a final result will produce
the same final result.

The quasi-determinism theorem I show says that if two executions
starting from a configuration $\conf$ terminate in configurations
$\conf'$ and $\conf''$, then either $\conf'$ and $\conf''$ are the
same configuration (up to a permutation on locations), or one of them
is $\error$.  As with the determinism proof for $\lambdaLVar$ that I
give in Section~\ref{s:lvars-proof}, quasi-determinism follows from a
series of supporting lemmas.  The basic structure of the proof follows
that of the $\lambdaLVar$ determinism proof closely.  Unlike for
$\lambdaLVar$, though, for $\lambdaLVish$ I do not need to prove a
Clash lemma (\eg, Lemma~\ref{lem:lvars-clash}) or an Error
Preservation lemma (\eg, Lemma~\ref{lem:lvars-error-preservation}).
Those lemmas are unnecessary here because quasi-determinism is a
weaker property than determinism.

\subsection{Permutations and permutability}\label{subsection:quasi-permutations}

As with $\lambdaLVar$, the $\lambdaLVish$ is nondeterministic with
respect to the names of locations it allocates.  We therefore prove
quasi-determinism up to a permutation on locations.  We can reuse the
definition of a permutation verbatim from
Section~\ref{subsection:lvars-permutations}:

\DefPermutation

We can then lift $\pi$ to apply expressions, stores, and
configurations.  Because expressions and stores are defined slightly
differently in $\lambdaLVish$ than they are in $\lambdaLVar$, we must
update our definitions of permutation of a store and permutation of an
expression:

\DefPermutationExpression

\DefPermutationStore

And the definition of permutation of a configuration is as it was before:

\DefPermutationConfiguration

We can now prove a Permutability lemma for $\lambdaLVish$, which says
that a configuration $\conf$ can step to $\conf'$ exactly when
$\pi(\conf)$ can step to $\pi(\conf')$.

\LemPermutability
\begin{proof}
  Similar to the proof of Lemma~\ref{lem:lvars-permutability}
  (Permutability for $\lambdaLVar$); see
  Section~\ref{section:permutability-proof}.
\end{proof}

\lk{For now, not saying anything about internal determinism, because I
  don't know if we need it.}

\subsection{Locality}

Just as with the determinism proof for $\lambdaLVar$, proving
quasi-determinism for $\lambdaLVish$ will require us to handle
expressions that can decompose into redex and context in multiple
ways.  An expression $e$ such that $e = \evalctxt{E_1}{e_1} =
\evalctxt{E_2}{e_2}$ can step in two different ways by the {\sc
  E-Eval-Ctxt} rule: $\config{S}{\evalctxt{E_1}{e_1}} \ctxstepsto
\config{S_1}{\evalctxt{E_1}{e'_1}}$, and
$\config{S}{\evalctxt{E_2}{e_2}} \ctxstepsto
\config{S_2}{\evalctxt{E_2}{e'_2}}$.

The Locality lemma says that $\ctxstepsto$ acts ``locally'' in each of
these steps: when $e_1$ steps to $e'_1$ within its context, the
expression $e_2$ will be left alone, because it belongs to the
context.  Likewise, when $e_2$ steps to $e'_2$ within its context, the
expression $e_1$ will be left alone.  The statement of the Locality
lemma is the same as that of Lemma~\ref{lem:lvars-locality} (Locality
for $\lambdaLVar$), but the proof must account for the set of possible
evaluation contexts in $\lambdaLVish$ being different (and larger).

\LemLocality
\begin{proof}
  \TODO{Add short description here once the proof is done.} See
  Section~\ref{section:locality-proof}.
\end{proof}

\subsection{Monotonicity}\label{subsection:quasi-monotonicity}

The Monotonicity lemma says that, as evaluation proceeds according to
the $\parstepsto$ relation, the store can only grow with respect to
the $\leqstore{}{}$ ordering.

\LemMonotonicity
\begin{proof}
  Straightforward by cases on the rule of the reduction semantics by
  which $\config{S}{e}$ steps to $\config{S'}{e'}$. The interesting
  cases are for the {\sc E-New} and {\sc E-Put} rules.  See
  Section~\ref{section:monotonicity-proof}.
\end{proof}

\subsection{Independence}\label{subsection:quasi-independence}

Like the lemma for $\lambdaLVar$ of the same name
(Lemma~\ref{lem:lvars-independence}), the Independence lemma
establishes a ``frame property'' for $\lambdaLVish$ that captures the
idea that independent effects commute with each other.  Just as for
$\lambdaLVar$, Lemma~\ref{lem:independence} requires as a precondition
that the store $S''$ must be \emph{non-conflicting}
(Definition~\ref{def:lvars-non-conflicting}) with the original
transition from $\config{S}{e}$ to $\config{S'}{e'}$, meaning that
locations in $S''$ cannot share names with locations newly allocated
during the transition, which rules out location name conflicts caused
by allocation.

In the context of $\lambdaLVish$, where freezing is possible, we have
an additional precondition that the stores $\lubstore{S'}{S''}$ and
$S$ are \emph{equal in status}---that, for all the locations shared
between them, the status bits of those locations agree.  This
assumption rules out interference from freezing.

\DefEqualStatus

\LemIndependence
\begin{proof}
  By cases on the rule of the reduction semantics by which
  $\config{S}{e}$ steps to $\config{S'}{e'}$. The interesting cases
  are for the {\sc E-New} and {\sc E-Put} rules.  Since
  $\config{S'}{e'} \neq \error$, we do not need to consider the {\sc
    E-Put-Err} rule.  See Section~\ref{section:independence-proof}.
\end{proof}

\subsection{Quasi-Confluence}\label{subsection:quasi-quasi-confluence}

Lemma~\ref{lem:strong-local-quasi-confluence} says that if a
configuration $\conf$ can step to configurations $\conf_a$ and
$\conf_b$, then one of two possibilities is true: either there exists
a configuration $\conf_c$ that $\conf_a$ and $\conf_b$ can each reach
in at most one step, modulo a permutation on locations, \emph{or} at
least one of $\conf_a$ or $\conf_b$ steps to $\error$.
Lemmas~\ref{lem:strong-one-sided-quasi-confluence}
and~\ref{lem:strong-quasi-confluence} then generalize that result to
arbitrary numbers of steps.

\LemStrongLocalQuasiConfluence
\begin{proof}
  Similar to the proof of
  Lemma~\ref{lem:lvars-strong-local-confluence} (Strong Local
  Confluence for $\lambdaLVar$); see
  Section~\ref{section:strong-local-quasi-confluence-proof}.
  \TODO{Update description here once the proof is done.}
\end{proof}

\LemStrongOneSidedQuasiConfluence
\begin{proof}
  By induction on $m$; see
  Section~\ref{section:strong-one-sided-quasi-confluence-proof}.
\end{proof}

\LemStrongQuasiConfluence
\begin{proof}
  By induction on $n$; see
  Section~\ref{section:strong-quasi-confluence-proof}.
\end{proof}

\LemQuasiConfluence
 
\subsection{Quasi-determinism theorem}\label{subsection:quasi-quasi-determinism}

The Quasi-Determinism theorem, Theorem~\ref{thm:quasi-determinism}, is
a straightforward result of Lemma~\ref{lem:quasi-confluence}.  It says
that if two executions starting from a configuration $\conf$ terminate
in configurations $\conf'$ and $\conf''$, then $\conf'$ and $\conf''$
are the same configuration, or one of them is $\error$.

\ThmQuasiDeterminism
\begin{proof}
  By Lemma~\ref{lem:quasi-confluence}, one of the following two cases
  applies:
  \begin{enumerate}
    \item There exists $\conf_c$ and $\pi$ such that $\conf'
      \ctxstepsto^* \conf_c$ and $\pi(\conf'') \ctxstepsto^* \conf_c$.
      Since $\conf'$ cannot step, we must have $\conf' = \conf_c$.

      By Lemma~\ref{lem:permutability} (Permutability), $\conf''$ can
      step iff $\pi(\conf'')$ can step, so since $\conf''$ cannot
      step, $\pi(\conf'')$ cannot step either.

      Hence we must have $\pi(\conf'') = \conf_c$.  Since $\conf' =
      \conf_c$ and $\pi(\conf'') = \conf_c$, $\conf' = \pi(\conf'')$.
    \item $\conf' = \error$ or $\conf'' = \error$, and so the result
      is immediate.
  \end{enumerate}
\end{proof}

\subsection{Discussion: quasi-determinism in practice}

\lk{I kinda threw this subsection in here on a whim.  Maybe it should
  actually go somewhere in Chapter 4, or maybe it should be its own
  section.}

The quasi-determinism result for $\lambdaLVish$ shows that it is not
possible to get multiple ``answers'' from the same program: every run
will either produce the same answer or an error.  Importantly, this
property is true not only for programs that use the freeze-after
pattern expressed by the $\FAW$ primitive, but even those that freeze
in arbitrary places using the simpler @freeze@ primitive.  This means
that in practice, in a programming model based on LVars with freezing
and handlers, even a program that fails to ensure quiescence
(introducing the possibility of a race between a @put@ and a
@freeze@) cannot produce multiple non-$\error$ answers.

Therefore the LVish programming model is fundamentally different from
one in which the programmer must manually insert synchronization
barriers to prevent data races.  In that kind of a model, a program
with a misplaced synchronization barrier can be fully
nondeterministic, producing multiple observable answers.  In the LVish
model, the worst that can happen is that the program raises an error.
Moreover, in the LVish model, an $\error$ result \emph{always} means
that there is an undersynchronization bug in the program, and in
principle the error message can even specify exactly which write
operation happened after which freeze operation, making it easier to
debug the problem.

However, if we \emph{can} ensure that an LVar is only ever frozen
\emph{after} all writes to that LVar have completed, then we can
guarantee full determinism, because we will have ruled out races
between write operations and freeze operations.  In the next chapter,
I discuss how the LVish Haskell library enforces this ``freeze after
writing'' property.
